Violence in Chicago has been historically concentrated in the West and South sides, disproportionately affecting communities of color. As a point of emphasis, the OCOS violence reduction plan aims to prioritize violence reduction efforts in the 15 community areas most affected by violence over the three-year period 2018-20 (“priority community areas”), as defined by the City as “serious victimizations” (homicides and non-fatal shootings). These 15 communities, as highlighted in Figure 3, are (alphabetically): Auburn Gresham, Austin, Chatham, Chicago Lawn, East Garfield Park, Englewood, Greater Grand Crossing, Humboldt Park, North Lawndale, Roseland, South Lawndale, South Shore, West Englewood, West Garfield Park, and West Pullman. The table in Figure 3 shows the average annual rate per 100,000 residents for homicides and non-fatal shootings during the baseline three-year period. A pattern of socioeconomic inequity has historically been a major driver of crime and violence in Chicago. As the first year of the OCOS violence reduction plan comes to a close, recognizing these inequalities is essential to shaping the future of public safety discourse in the City. To achieve meaningful and long-lasting improvements to our community safety, we will need to address socioeconomic barriers, particularly in our most violent neighborhoods. Furthermore, there are challenges with disentangling and estimating the effects of COVID-19 on public safety and increasing violence in Chicagoland during the last two years (i.e., 2020 and 2021). As seen on a national level, the pandemic has placed a significant economic burden on neighborhoods, particularly those that were already experiencing lower economic activity and prosperity. Chicago and many other large metropolitan cities began to experience increases in violence in the wake of the pandemic. For instance, from the start of Illinois’ Stay at Home Order in March 2020 to early August 2020, the number of shooting victims in Chicago increased 43% as compared to the same period averaged over the previous three years. Increases in shootings and other violent incidents were are also experienced in other cities such as New York, Los Angeles, and Philadelphia. It is difficult to pinpoint the exact cause as several factors played key roles, such as the economic hardships and increasing unemployment rates due to the COVID-19 pandemic; closure of schools, after-school, and summer programs; and the civil unrest and the challenged relationships between communities and the police following the police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis. We will follow the evolving research on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on crime and the factors driving the surge in violent crime, and develop evidence-based and data-driven policies in response. This report represents an effort to better understand the state of violence in Chicago in the year and a half timeframe since the OCOS violence reduction plan was introduced by the Office of the Mayor while considering all the mentioned challenges. To achieve this goal, this report provides an assessment of several public safety-related measures which are indicative of the strategic initiatives embedded within the five OCOS pillars. The Mayor’s Office of Public Safety formed a Public Safety Research Advisory Council comprised of university representatives from Chicago with expertise in violence reduction to assist in evaluation efforts for the OCOS strategy. Together, the Council identified indicators to measure progress in each OCOS pillar, as shown below. The Mayor’s Office of Public Safety worked with departments and agencies from City government to collect the data and information used in the OCOS findings. These agencies include Chicago Police Department, Chicago Department of Public Health, Department of Family and Support Services, Office of Emergency Management and Communications, City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago Public Schools, and other partners around the City.