The City is placing emphasis on making communities most affected by violence safer by reclaiming public places as safe spaces
within communities by promoting community well-being with stable housing, amenities, commerce, and opportunities. Indicators
associated with this pillar include community perception of resource accessibility and safety; 311 requests for public safetyrelated services; 911 calls related to violence; the safety gap; vacant lot restoration; and infrastructure improvements.
Understanding community perceptions of safety and resource accessibility will be a crucial first step in advancing the ability
to protect and secure places in Chicago. Assessment of these perceptions was measured using data provided by the Chicago
Department of Public Health from the community-based survey, Healthy Chicago Survey, 2020 (Figures 11-13).20 Items from the
survey were demarcated into several neighborhood constructs, including:
Safety:
- “Do you feel safe in your neighborhood?”
- “In your neighborhood, how often does violence occur?”
Institutional Trust:
- “To what extent do you trust local government to do what’s right for your community?”
- “To what extend do you trust your local government to do what’s right for your community”
Resource Accessibility:
- “It is easy to walk, scoot or roll to a transit stop (bus, train) from my home”
Examining responses from these survey items from a city-wide level, while instructive, may tell an incomplete story of public
perceptions of safety, institutional trust, and resource accessibility among specific populations and communities. For instance,
when compared to other racial/ethnic groups, non-Latinx Black/African Americans report the lowest trust of law enforcement, and
lowest perceived neighborhood safety, but similar rates of exposure to violence as non-Latinx Whites. Gathering more data for the
next few years will be essential in achieving a more complete picture and understanding of community perception of resource
accessibility and safety. The Office of the Mayor will continue to work with Healthy Chicago Survey to achieve this goal. 
In order to address the institutional trust in government and ensure safety of Chicagoans in their neighborhoods, the City of Chicago
implemented a new approach in summer 2021. The Summer Safety Strategy (SSS) was a holistic strategy to address community
safety at a hyperlocal level. The SSS approach involved a) identifying the most violent police beats across the city, b) convening
local leaders and service providers along with key city departments, and c) targeting the remediation of “hot” issues on a weekly
basis. Coordination included  maintaining City department presence through City service blitzes, tailored police deployments
that included proactive engagement such as foot patrols and community safety walks, and collaboration with community-based
organizations to provide services to community members. For instance, the Chicago Department of Transportation made sure to
provide adequate lighting in hotspots, Department of Streets and Sanitation cleaned and cleared vacant lots, and the Department
of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection provided additional security support for businesses.
Institutional trust and perception of safety may also be elevated by addressing the disproportionate amount of violence in
communities of color. For this reason, the concept and estimation of the “safety gap” is a key outcome for the OCOS plan. The
safety gap provides an indication of disparity between communities historically known to experience high levels of violence and
communities that historically have experienced relatively low levels of violence.
The safety gap was calculated by comparing the serious victimization (fatal and non-fatal shootings) rates for the 15 priority
community areas with the highest serious victimization rates to the remaining 62 community areas. These geographically based
rates per 10,000 residents21 were then compared annually between 2018 and 2021. (Figure 14). Using this methodology, the
safety gap has generally increased over time (particularly between 2018-19 and 2020-21), indicating an increasing disparity (i.e.,
difference) in serious victimizations between the 15 priority community areas compared to the remaining 62 community areas. In
other words, these 15 community areas have had higher rates of fatal and non-fatal shootings per 10,000 residents, than all other
62 communities combined. 
The safety gap is a key indicator for long-term progress of our violence reduction strategy in Chicago. During 2020-21, many of
the neighborhoods most affected by violence were also managing the challenges associated with COVID-19, which could partially
explain the widening of the safety gap. A continued commitment to vigilant monitoring of geographic disparities in violence is a
primary point of emphasis for the City.
Calls for service are an additional indicator that can potentially help shed light on trends of violence and public safety in Chicago.
However, these measures do have limitations, as research indicates that African Americans are less likely to call 911 for matters
of personal and public safety.22
There was a very slight decreasing trend of total 911 calls and 911 calls for violent crimes during 2018-21. Aggravated batteries
were the most common violent crime-related 911 calls, accounting for an average of 57.8% of all violent crime-related 911 calls
during this time span (Figure 15).
While aggravated batteries accounted for more than half of all violent-crime related calls, it is important to note that most 911 calls
were regarding non-violent crimes (e.g., disturbances, property crimes). In fact, during the four-year period, violent crime related
calls accounted for only an average of 1.61% of all 911 calls annually (Figure 16).
There was an overall increasing trend of total 311 calls during 2018-21. However, when examining specifically public safety-related
311 calls23 (e.g., those related to graffiti, non-functioning streetlights, abandoned buildings, etc.), a slight decreasing trend was
observed. Graffiti removal was the most common concern, accounting for an average of 63% of public-safety related calls to 311
(Figure 17).
Further, most 311 calls are not public safety related. Overall, during the four-year period, public safety-related 311 calls accounted
for an average of 6.8% of all 311 calls annually, and tended to decrease over time (Figure 18).
In order to address these public safety concerns in the short-term and reduce the safety gap in the long-term, the City has invested
in several place-based initiatives and programs. Some of the City’s primary initiatives to protect and secure places have been the
Invest South/West Initiative, the Neighborhood Activation Initiative, and the intentional restoration of vacant spaces.
Invest South/West: This Mayoral initiative that was launched in 2019 in collaboration with the Department of Planning and
Development (DPD) has now totaled more than $1.4 billion in public and private investments to support small businesses, create
public realm improvements, restore buildings, and foster equity.
Neighborhood Activation: This is a focused violence prevention and community investment initiative that combines community
aspirations with City investments and assets to implement programs, social services, and changes to the built environment at a
hyper-local block level.
The first pilot of Neighborhood Activation is focused on a few key blocks in West Garfield Park. The Office of the Mayor partnered
with the Garfield Park Rite to Wellness Collaborative, Studio Gang, the Goldin Institute, and community residents to understand
community needs and envision solutions. Resulting projects included tree planting, youth summer jobs and programming,
beautification of vacant lots, monthly produce markets at Legler Library in partnership with the Greater Chicago Food Depository,
improvements to the public way to promote pedestrian safety, mural and art projects, community-designed street banners, and
more, with additional investments to come.
One key project was the development of a Community Plaza and Roller Rink at 4008 W. Madison Street. The Community Plaza is
a safe outdoor space in the neighborhood for residents to gather and build community.
Vacant Lot Restoration: There has been strong evidence to suggest that unmaintained, vegetative spaces which are subject to
blight may foster crime. Conversely, areas of maintained and healthy vegetation are believed to be protective against crime.24
Research has suggested that as physical signs of disorder become more apparent in a neighborhood, residents are not as likely
to interact, causing reduced community attachment, collective efficacy, and mobility.25 Through an $87M investment in vacant lot
restoration in 2022, the City aims to reactivate vacant city-owned land and build community wealth by streamlining environmental
reviews and transferring ownership to neighborhood residents for community benefit.
Additionally, the City has dedicated ARP Funding to directly enhance place-based strategies such as housing investments,
revitalization of commercial corridors, and improvement of local parks, all of which create community infrastructure which can
promote reduction of violence. A detailed breakdown of these efforts is listed below:
- $241.4M in housing investments to create and preserve safe and affordable housing:
- $12M for an acquisition rehab program to identify and restore troubled and abandoned homes and buildings
 in priority neighborhoods.
- $75.1M to create mixed-use, multi-family developments
- $30M to support owner-occupied repairs and smaller scale rehabs
- $60.3M to address home hazards such as lead-based paint
- $11M to provide direct homebuyer assistance and expand opportunities for home ownership through land preparation
 $186M to support small businesses, revitalize commercial corridors, and create local opportunities:
- $77M to revitalize commercial corridors, support small business owners, activate vacant storefronts,
 and bring neighborhood amenities to communities
- $54M to rehabilitate vacant commercial and mixed-use buildings in commercial corridors
- $15M to promote community wealth building via business ownerships
- $10M to expand food equity through entrepreneurship
- $20M to support business development and tourism
- $10M to support equitable transit-oriented development
- $16M to support arts and culture
- $35.6M to improve local parks
