With a national spotlight placed on the relationship between individuals and law enforcement in the last year, the City has
redoubled its commitment to increasing police legitimacy in communities where trust has eroded by ensuring humane, effective,
and constitutional law enforcement practices. Indicators for this pillar include the following: community perception of trust in law
enforcement; clearance rate for homicides and non-fatal shootings; use of force; guns recovered; police department staff who
completed Crisis Intervention Training; consent decree compliance; and staff recruited and promoted to meet diversity, equity, and
inclusion standards.
In partnership with ZenCity (previously Elucd), the Chicago Police Department gathers 1,500-2,000 survey responses from Chicago
residents every month, across all 22 police districts in the City to better understand perceptions of safety and levels of trust in law
enforcement. On a scale of 1-10, individuals are asked to respond to questions regarding
- Perception of safety in Chicago:
- “When it comes to the threat of crime, how safe do you feel in your neighborhood?”
- Trust in law enforcement (average taken for the following two items):
- “How much do you agree with this statement? The police in my neighborhood listen to and take into
 account the concerns of local residents”
- “How much do you agree with this statement? The police in my neighborhood treat local residents with respect”26
Examination of these data revealed a steady decline in perception of safety which could be attributed to the rise in violent crimes.
However, perceptions of trust in law enforcement have fluctuated over the years. Although there was a decrease in the average
trust score in 2021 as compared to 2020, the longer-term trend shows a slight increase in overall trust scores during the 2018-21
period (Figure 19). 
The ability of police to clear cases in a timely manner can have impacts on residents’ trust in law enforcement, actual levels of
safety, and the reduction of violence.27 “Clearance by arrest” is defined as at least one person associated with a crime being arrested,
charged, and turned over to the court for prosecution. “Clearance by exception” refers to the scenario when elements beyond law
enforcement’s control prevent the agency from arresting and charging an offender. In order to clear an offense exceptionally, the
agency must meet all of the 4 following criteria: the agency must have a) identified the offender; b) gathered enough evidence to
support an arrest, make a charge, and turn over the offender to the court for prosecution; c) identified the offender’s exact location;
d) encountered a circumstance outside the control of law enforcement that prohibits arrest (e.g., death of offender).28
Over the previous four-year period, annual clearance rates (which includes both clearance by arrest and exception) for homicides
were between 41.6% and 49.2%, with the highest rate being observed in 2019. Annual clearance rates for non-fatal shootings were
between 7.9% and 11.9%, with the lowest rate being observed in 2020 (Figure 20). 
As can be seen in Figure 21, there is stability over time for clearance by exception for non-fatal shootings. Comparatively, clearance
by exception rates for homicides were more unstable; while there was a significant decrease in clearance by exception in 2020 as
compared to 2019, the rate increased again in 2021. The trends for clearance by arrest remained mostly stable for homicides and
shootings between 2018 and 2021 (Figure 22).
Improving law enforcement performance and enhancing community safety may also be achieved through the removal of guns
from the streets. Taking guns out of communities may fall into two distinct categories: gun recovery (criminal circumstances) and
guns that are turned in or found (non-criminal circumstances). Inclusively, there has been a general increase in guns recovered/
turned in or found between 2018 and 2021 (Figure 23). For both categories combined, more than 50% of guns were from the 15
priority community areas annually (Figure 24).
In addition to improving clearance rates and taking guns off the streets, trust in law enforcement can be strengthened by enhancing
the quality of citizen-police interactions. The stability of these interactions can be approximated by examining police use of force
via Tactical Response Report (TRR) documentation. TRRs are used to document, investigate, and evaluate reported use of force
incidents where members respond to the actions of a subject, including any force mitigation efforts, or when members use a
reportable use of force. Between 2018 and 2021, we see consistency of the percentage of TRRs by subject race, as seen in Figure
25 (predominantly Black; approximately 75% of annual TRRs). Overall, the frequency of TRRs decreased in 2021 (3,318 reports)
compared to the annual average between 2018 and 2020 (4,645 reports). 
In order to reduce the racial disparity of subject injury by police, CPD conducted extensive community engagement on various
CPD policies, including Use of Force, School Resource Officers, and interactions with members of specific populations, such as
transgender, intersex, and gender non-confirming individuals. CPD also improved transparency by revamping their public use of
force dashboard.
Police officers often respond to situations involving individuals experiencing a behavioral or mental health crisis. To remedy
increasing rates of use of force interactions between citizens in crisis and police officers, the Chicago Police Department has
invested in training and staffing the Crisis Intervention Team (CIT). An explicit goal of trainings is to ensure that police interactions
with individuals in crisis will be carried out with dignity and respect.29 Officers who have completed this 40-hour training are more
knowledgeable about the signs and symptoms of mental illness, and are trained on how to interact, intervene, and de-escalate
situations with persons in crisis and potentially in need of a psychiatric evaluation.30 During the time period 2018-2021, 1,720 law
enforcement officers completed CIT training. Compared to previous years, a drop in enrollment was experienced in 2020, which
may be partly attributed to a temporary suspension of training due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The demographic profile of CITtrained officers during 2018-21 was consistent with the current demographic profile of the police force as a whole: 71.6% male
(74.8% for all CPD), 22.9% Black (22.2% for all CPD), 26.2% Hispanic (28.3% for all CPD; includes individuals identifying as Hispanic,
White Hispanic, and Black Hispanic), and 46.6% White (45.4% for all CPD) (Figure 26).
One of the important initiatives to increase the sense of safety and trust in law enforcement is the Chicago Neighborhood
Policing Initiative (CNPI). In January 2019, the Chicago Police Department in collaboration with the Policing Project at New York
University School of Law launched CNPI, a pilot in the 25th District designed to increase positive contact between police officers
and neighborhood community members.31 Interim findings published in May 2021 by Northwestern University’s N3 show that
both CPD and residents noted positive changes in the first year of the program in the relationship between police and community.
However, as the COVID-19 pandemic and civil unrest following the murder of George Floyd affected the City, CPD was forced to
shift its focus to the immediate needs of the City’s communities. The pandemic also caused obstacles by limiting face-to-face
interactions and close collaborations with community-based organizations, both of which were crucial to the CNPI foundation,
and thus limited the potential beneficial effects of the program. Currently, the CNPI has expanded its reach to 10 police districts
(3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, and 25) to continue fostering problem solving and relationship building between community and police.
In addition, the Chicago Police Department is under Consent Decree through the Department of Justice and the Illinois Attorney
General’s Office.32 This Consent Decree guides reform efforts and consists of 799 paragraphs. On a regular basis, the Independent
Monitoring Team (IMT) assesses the department’s progress toward the aims expressed in each paragraph. Reform of the
department is considered to be a primary driver of violence reduction efforts, in that as the public increases its trust in the police
department, their partnership and cooperation with the police enables higher levels of service and protection. The City of Chicago
achieved some level of compliance with over half of the 507 paragraphs assessed in the IMT’s fourth report. Chicago has achieved
some level of compliance with more paragraphs than any other comparable city in its first two years under consent decree (total
of 266 paragraphs). CPD achieved several accomplishments with respect to the Consent Decree in 2021 in the below topic areas.
- Community Policing:
- Expanded the Neighborhood Policing Initiative, which emphasizes problem solving and relationship building,
 to 10 police districts
- Implemented an annual community-driven, district-level strategic planning process in all 22 districts
-Impartial Policing:
- Hired CPD’s first-ever language access and Americans with Disabilities Act coordinators
- Revised Department’s policy on interactions with Transgender, Intersex, and Gender Non-Conforming
 individuals based on extensive community dialogue
- Delivered a 24-hour, three-part training on Procedural Justice to in-service members
- Crisis Intervention:
- Revised CPD’s suite of policies on response to individuals in crisis with extensive community input from the
 Chicago Council on Mental Health Equity
- Revised Department’s 40-hour Basic CIT training for certified CIT officers with extensive input from a
 community working group
- Use of Force:
- Revised CPD’s suite of use of force policies multiple times, based on extensive dialogue with the community
- Implemented mandatory annual in-service training for all officers on de-escalation, response to resistance, and use of force
- Created the Force Review Division to conduct systematic reviews of use of force incidents
- Recruitment, Hiring, and Promotions:
- Completed an extensive, independent evaluation of the Department’s promotional processes for the ranks
 of Sergeant and Lieutenant
- Created a brand-new unit dedicated exclusively to recruitment efforts in an effort to grow and diversify pool of
 police officer candidates
- Training:
- Increased the number of mandatory annual training hours for in-service officers from 0 prior to the consent
 decree to now 40 hours in 2021
- Supervision:
- Developed expansion plans of the Unity of Command/Span of Control pilot program, which will help
 supervisors be better equipped to lead, monitor & assist officers under their supervision
- Piloted a new staffing model that limits the number of officers per supervisor and ensures consistency of
 supervision day-to-day
- Started a pilot program for CPD’s new Officer Support System to identify and support officers who may be at
 risk for adverse outcomes. This program will serve as a national model for identifying the assisting officers in need
- Officer Wellness:
- Expanded the clinical capacity from 3 full-time clinicians to 10 full-time clinicians
- Accountability & Transparency:
- Began publicly publishing summary reports that detail misconduct investigations and findings, improving
 transparency on accountability procedures
- Data Collection, Analysis, and Management:
- Published new public dashboards on use of force, accountability, community sentiment, and other metrics to
 improve transparency
- Piloted a new Officer Support System designed to help supervisors identify members who may be at-risk for
 adverse outcomes and determine possible interventions and supports for those members
