The City emphasizes developing policies that are fair, effective, inclusive, and reflective of the community needs. In 2021, the City Plan and Coordinate
implemented several policies related to public safety and violence reduction:
- Research has long shown an association between increases in violent crime incidents and outlets that sell alcohol for off-premise
consumption such as liquor stores.33 In June 2021, as part of the “Chi Biz Strong” package, the City Council passed a legislation
prohibiting the sale of packaged alcohol after 12:00 am to reduce neighborhood disturbances and ensure the safety of residents.34
- In July 2021, the City Council passed legislation to create the Community Commission for Public Safety and Accountability
which will enable the public to have a direct hand in police department policymaking. In January 2022, Mayor Lightfoot selected
Executive Director Adam Gross to lead the Commission’s important work.
- In September 2021, the Mayor published the City’s first ever citywide strategic plan to address gender-based violence (GBV) and
human trafficking. The work to build this plan began in February 2021 when Mayor Lightfoot launched the GBV Advisory Council.
Since then, the City has led a robust and inclusive community engagement process, bringing together community partners,
survivors, and City officials to define key problems and solutions-driven strategies. As part of the overall violence reduction
strategy, this plan seeks to build the muscle within City government to understand and address GBV and human trafficking; design
a citywide ecosystem that adequately prevents, responds, and intervenes in cases of GBV and human trafficking in traumainformed and culturally specific ways; and invest in critical services to stabilize survivors and increase safety.
- The City piloted the Crisis Assistance Response and Engagement Program (CARE) in Fall 2021 to help resolve immediate mental
health related emergencies. The CARE Program integrates behavioral healthcare professionals into the 911 response system to
ensure that individuals experiencing a behavioral health crisis are met with a team of professionals who can help to resolve the
immediate crisis and connect the person in crisis to appropriate community-based resources and supports. Furthermore, as part
of Mayor’s commitment to transparency and data-driven policy making, the City is partnering with University of Chicago, Health
Lab to conduct a process evaluation of the CARE program.
- In November 2021, Mayor Lightfoot signed an executive order, creating the Chicago Interagency Reentry Council, tasked with
promoting positive reentry for Chicagoans returning from incarceration in prison and jail. 