While there are various City-led initiatives alongside community-based efforts to address violence in Chicago, most of these Plan and Coordinate
efforts have operated in silos. In August, 2021, Mayor Lightfoot activated the Community Safety Coordination Center (CSCC) to
provide the coordination and resources needed to implement the strategies within OCOS. Led by a Chief Coordination Officer, the
CSCC brings together representatives from City departments with community organizations to:
- engage residents and organizations in ways that are inclusive of the whole community and include representatives from
healthcare and mental health, violence reduction, youth services, victim services, education, faith organizations, local businesses,
elected officials, and City services;
- provide transparent data sources and analysis on violent crime and the root causes of violence, including data on where violence
occurs, how the built environment influences violence, and where communities require additional capacity to support those at risk
of violence;
- and coordinate City services to rapidly respond to the needs identified by community members to prevent or reduce violence.
The CSCC will coordinate activities that impact every community in Chicago, but is focused on implementing operations in the
15 priority communities identified in OCOS. To ensure the CSCC’s approach is guided by an overarching strategy informed by
community, a Launch Committee was formed to develop guiding principles for the CSCC work and implement community-driven
initiatives. The Launch Committee includes representatives from OCOS focus communities, violence prevention experts, and
research leaders from throughout the City.
A critical part of the CSCC is to coordinate the City’s own resources through the lens of violence reduction, including the funding
being allocated towards programming and operations. A strategic advisory group was formed that includes senior leadership
from the Office of the Mayor and several key departments. Together, the advisory group is working to implement a community
safety framework to ensure alignment with policies and strategies identified in OCOS. Under the CSCC framework, near-term
public safety activities are described in Figure 27.